= Lab - Core Document Operations

Prior to this, you need to have
completed xref:Logging-into-Couchbase.adoc[Lab 1 - Logging into Couchbase] before starting this lab.

== Objective

This lab is designed to get you familiar with Couchbase Server. You will
learn about buckets, keys and JSON documents work. You will be creating
new documents, finding documents by key, making changes to documents,
and deleting documents. At the end of this lab, you will understand how
to do all those operations within the Couchbase Console.

The following steps should take approximately 10 to 15 minutes.

== Steps

=== Introduction to documents

The fundamental unit of data in Couchbase Server (or any document
database) is the document.

Each document is simply a JSON entity. It could be a JSON array, but it
is typically a single JSON document. This is an example of a document
that is in the travel-sample bucket that you loaded in the previous lab.

[source,javascript]
----
 {
    "airline": "AF",
    "sourceairport": "TLV",
    "destinationairport": "MRS",
    "airlineid": "airline_137",
    "distance": 2881.617376098415,
    "equipment": "320",
    "stops": 0,
    "type": "route"
    "schedule": [
        {
            "day": 0,
            "flight": "AF198",
            "utc": "10:13:00"
        },
        {
            "day": 6,
            "flight": "AF496",
            "utc": "19:14:00"
        }, ...
    ],
    ...
}
----

This is a document that represents an airline route. It has a number of
simple data fields: airline, sourceairport, type, and so on. But it also
can store more complex, structured data. The `+schedule+` field is an
array of JSON objects. In a relational database, this would typically be
stored as multiple rows in separate table, but it is stored all in one
piece in a _denormalized_ form in a document database.

Each document is identified by a ``key''. In Couchbase Server, that key
is not part of JSON object, but it is ``metadata''. A document key can
be any value you want it to be. This document has a key of
*route_10000*, for instance.

=== What is a bucket?

In Couchbase Server, documents are stored in named *buckets*. Within a
bucket, each document must have a unique key. Beyond that, there is no
restriction on the shape of the data from document to document. A bucket
called *travel-sample*, for instance, could have several thousand
airline route documents like the one above, but it could also have
hundreds of documents that represent airlines, landmarks, airports, and
hotels.

This flexibility is why document databases are said to be
``schemaless''.

Couchbase Server does not tell individual documents what fields they
should or shouldn’t have. This is why you often see fields like `+type+`
in the above route example, to act as a sort of discriminator flag for
organizational purposes. Although they can be helpful, discriminator
fields like `+type+` are not required, ``type'' not a reserved word, and
the field is not treated any differently in Couchbase than the other
fields.

=== Create a new document

From the Couchbase Console, click ``Data Buckets''.

The ``travel-sample'' bucket should be listed (it was created in the
first lab). Locate it on list of buckets and click the ``Documents''
button.

image::2/0201-bucket-list.png[List of buckets in Couchbase
Console]

You should now see a list of documents. The ID column shows the key for
each document, and the Content column shows a partial excerpt of the
JSON document. To create a new document, click the ``Create Document''
button.

image::2/0202-document-list.png[List of documents in a bucket]

After clicking the ``Create Document'' button, you will be prompted for
a document ID. It must be unique to that bucket. If I typed in
``airline_10'' for instance, I would get an error message. Enter a
creative ID like ``lab2document''. A document with that key and some
default JSON will be created, and you will be taken to a page where you
can make changes to the JSON.

image::2/0203-edit-document.png[Edit document]

Enter the following JSON and then click the ``Save'' button.

[source,javascript]
----
{
    "name": "Matthew",
    "shoeSize": 13
}
----

If, at any point, the JSON you are entering isn’t valid, an error
message will appear on the screen. Once you’re done, click the
``Documents'' link to go back to the list of documents. Feel free to
experiment and create additional document if you’d like.

=== Finding a document by key

This bucket has a large amount of documents. You can go right to a
specific document by using its key. Enter the key *route_10000* and
click the ``Lookup Id'' button.

image::2/0204-lookup-by-key.png[Lookup document by key]

You should be taken to the document that was shown at the very beginning
of this lab. It’s an airline route from Ben Gurion Airport in Tel Aviv
(TLV) to Marseille Provence Airport in France (MRS). We don’t know the
name of the airline from looking at just this document, but note that
the `+airlineid+` has a value of *airline_137*. To find out the name of
the airline, look up that document by key.

=== Make changes to a document

Lookup the document you created earlier (by key *lab2document*). Let’s
make a change to this document. Let’s add something a little more
interesting than a flat field:

[source,javascript]
----
//TODO: update this to something in the same context
{
  "name": "Matthew",
  "shoeSize": 13,
  "socialMedia": [
      { "twitter": "mgroves" },
      { "github": "mgroves" },
      { "linkedin": "https://www.linkedin.com/in/mgroves/" }
  ]
}
----

Click the ``Save'' button to make these changes. Notice that I evolved
the structure of this data without updating any schema or affecting the
other documents in this database. It’s possible that some documents have
`+socialMedia+` and some don’t. That flexibility/tradeoff makes
Couchbase suitable to agile development and to situations where you need
to ingest data from multiple sources that have changing data structures.

=== Delete a document

Finally, you can delete a document. Just click the ``Delete'' button
from the document list page, or from the individual document editing
page.

Note that there are no referential constraints to take into account. If
I deleted the *airline_137* document, for instance, the *route_10000*
document would still have an airlineid, and it would still have a value
of *airline_137*.

Next, learn a bit about how what you have seen above leads to xref:Document-Operations-Perform-at-Scale.adoc[performing at scale and what your next steps] are.