= Lab 1 - Logging into Couchbase

During this lab you’ll login to Couchbase for the first time. You need
to complete this lab before starting any of the other labs.

== Objective

This lab is designed to get you started with Couchbase Server. You’ll
login to the Couchbase Console. In the console, you will load up a
bucket of sample data. Finally, you will view the Sync Gateway console.

This lab will not be covering any clients or SDK usage. You will not do
anything with the Sync Gateway console in later labs (yet).

== Steps

=== Login to the Couchbase Console

Start by going to the Server Admin URL. You will be prompted with a
login form. Enter the credentials you received in the last step. Click
``Sign In''.

image:/images/1/0105-login.png[Travel-sample bucket]

Once you successfully login, you will see the Couchbase Enterprise
Edition console. You will be looking at the ``Overview'' section
initially. Feel free to navigate around to anything that interests you.
Here are a few places of interest to get you started:

* *Server Nodes* - This will show you a list of all the nodes in the
cluster. Each ``node'' is a separate VM with Couchbase Server installed
that joins together into a single ``cluster''. In a production
deployment, you can add nodes to a cluster within the UI, with a command
line utility, or with a REST API.
* *Data Buckets* - In Couchbase Server, a ``bucket'' is the fundamental
data container. Each bucket contains documents. When clicking ``Data
Buckets'', you will see a list of all the buckets that live in the
cluster. To start with, the Test Drive has created a single bucket
called ``sync_gateway''. Later, you’ll be creating another bucket.
* *Query* - When you want to run N1QL queries, you can do so from this
tab that takes you to the Query Workbench. More on this in
link:3%20-%20Querying%20with%20N1QL.md[Lab 3 - Querying with N1QL].

=== Load ``travel-sample'' data

In the Couchbase Console, click the ``Settings'' tab.

Once in Settings, click the ``Sample Buckets'' button. Under ``Available
Samples'', find ``travel-sample'' and check the box. Click ``Create'' to
start loading this sample bucket.

image:/images/1/0106-travel-sample.png[Travel-sample bucket]

The ``travel-sample'' is a set of sample documents that will be loaded
into a new bucket called ``travel-sample''. It contains five different
kinds of documents: airlines, airports, routes, hotels, and landmarks.
This sample data is meant to help you explore the features and
functionality of Couchbase Server. You will use this bucket in the later
test drive labs.

image:/images/1/0107-loading-travel-sample.png[Loading travel-sample
bucket]

The bucket will take a minute or so to completely load. Click on ``Data
Buckets'' to see a list of all the buckets in this cluster. The
``sync_gateway'' should still be there, and now ``travel-sample'' should
be on the list too.

When complete, there should be 31,591 documents in the ``travel-sample''
bucket (look in the `item count' column).

image:/images/1/0108-bucket-complete.png[Travel sample completely
loaded]

=== Sync Gateway

Sync Gateway is separate from Couchbase Server, but it allows Couchbase
Lite databases (on mobile devices) to sync with each other and with
Couchbase Server automatically.

This lab does not include details on how to use Sync Gateway. You can
visit the Sync Gateway Admin console via the URL that you saw in
``Access information'' earlier.

image:/images/1/0109-sync-gateway.png[Sync Gateway]

If you are interested in learning more about Sync Gateway, check out the
http://docs.couchbase.com/sync-gateway/[Sync Gateway documentation] and
http://developer.couchbase.com/mobile/[Sync Gateway samples].

== Summary

You are now ready to begin labs 2, 3, and 4. The next lab is about
link:2%20-%20Key%20Value%20Document%20Storage.md[Key Value Document
Storage], but you can complete the labs in any order you choose.

For more information about Couchbase Server or Sync Gateway on Google
Cloud Launcher, please contact partners@couchbase.com or
sales@couchbase.com.
